well student L protests and encampments
against the war in Gaza are continuing
for a second week in the US that
demanding their universities drop
Financial ties to Israel well we have a
team of correspondents covering this
story for us in the US in a moment We'll
Be Live to New York with John hendin but
first let's go to Ellen Fischer who's at
the George Washington University in
Washington DC where students from at
least eight universities have joined the
fourth day of protests and Ellen I know
it's Sunday there I imagine it's usually
relatively quiet on campus can you just
explain what is happening there
now well let me give you an idea of what
it looks like here you've seen the
pictures over the last three or four
days and you've seen the hundreds of
students that come here to protest that
things have slightly changed and Sunday
morning is maybe the best time to give
you an idea of what this looks like if
you look out into the college yard when
this protest started on Thursday that
was entirely covered by people who came
here to voice their support over night
on Saturday Friday into Saturday they
put up the metal barrier to split the
yach and to contain the protests now if
you move further around with the camera
you will see that there are still tents
in the yard there's probably about 20
students who are there a number of them
have left over the last 72 hours or so
when they were told that there was the
possibility they could lose their
University Housing they could possibly
not graduate they might lose credits for
for the the term that's just uh happened
and so so a number of them decided at
that point they were going to leave now
the university asked the Metropolitan
Police which is the main Police Service
here in Washington DC to help clear the
yard on Friday but the Metropolitan
Police decided that they weren't going
to do that the protests were very
peaceful and they didn't think the
Optics of forcibly removing people who
were protesting peacefully would play
well not just here in Washington DC but
around the world but what has happened
is there's now almost like a second
protest in the street which has been
sealed off by the police and you can see
the camps and the tents that have been
set up here people have been spending
the night sleeping in those tents in
support of those inside and the demands
really do remain the same although each
of the eight or so universities that are
represented here have their own
individual items that they want to see
addressed by their institution generally
speaking they all agree on a number of
things they want to make sure that every
uh asset that is possibly linked to
Israel is divested that there are no
continuing academic links between the us
at these universities and Israel as well
they want to make sure that those who
organize the protest will face an
amnesty that they will not be uh face
any sort of uh disciplinary action as
well and they want to make sure that Pro
Palestinian speech on these campuses
will not be penalized in any way that'll
be allowed because there have been a
number of complaints that as soon as you
talk in prop Palestinian terms you're
immediately described
as being anti-semitic and they want to
make sure that that is taken care of by
the authorities now a couple of the
administrators from George Washington
have been in in the square in in the
last couple of hours they've spoken to
some of the people in the courtyard but
those that are here say what they said
way back on Thursday until their demands
are met they're not moving okay thanks
so much Ellen we really appreciate that
Ellen Fischer for us there at George
Washington University well this is day
four of protest
the City University of New York on day
one campus police tried to shut it down
and protesters pushed them back let's
bring in John hendren who is at the City
University now and John these protest
site this protest site specifically
remains under constant threat of being
shut down can you just explain exactly
why that
is that's right here on the first day on
Thursday when they set up this Camp
campus police came in and tried to shut
it down tried to tear down the tents
students pushed them back and these are
the most Fearless protesters of all of
the campuses we've been at uh and there
is good reason for that uh this is City
University of New York unlike Elite
institutions like those alen was talking
about where tuition can be 60
70,000 a year and students are worried
about losing their the education they've
dreamed of and tens of thousands of
dollars tuition here is at a more
democratic level small D at about six
,000 um and so most of the students we
see here unlike at Princeton where we
were yesterday where students were
masking their faces and and trying to
abide by all the University's rules here
they're not doing that when the security
came in just the other day uh there was
a security guard here uh on Friday and
he was just trying to enter this space
and students blocked him off from doing
so and you can see there's a constant
police presence here that is a light
stand which police have set up
presumably if they want to clear this
place out at night to light it up and if
you look across the street you can see
those are campus police uh positioned
there so there's a constant presence
here but unlike at other campuses where
students are very concerned about
whether they're going to be kicked out
and whether they're going to lose their
status at the University here they're
they're pretty much Fearless these
students by and large don't wear masks
they push back on security when they
come and they're intent on staying here
you can see these uh these tents are in
defiance of University policy but
they're remaining in place so here at
City University of New York uh you have
a very aggressive and confident protest
presence uh and they're not going to
allow uh security to come in here now if
the New York Police Department comes in
that's a whole different story and that
could happen here unlike other campuses
because it's run by the city of New York
so mayor Eric Adams if he decided to
could override it any concerns by the
university and send police in here to
shut this place down and uh 200 people
have been arrested over the past 24
hours at Washington University in St
Louis Northeastern University in Boston
so that's a constant threat everywhere
but here it's a particular threat
because the city itself could decide to
shut this place down so far protesters
have resisted all attempts okay thank
you so much for all of that that is John
hendin for us there in New York well
we're going to stay with this story and
Melanie KT is a professor of
international Affairs at Harvard
University she joins us from New York
thank you very much for being with us on
Al jazer now we heard our correspondents
there talking about the pressure that
has been uh placed on the protesters on
these students that have speaking out
but how has the government especially
Congress been putting pressure on the
universities themselves during these
protests and and what impact is that
having yeah first of all thank you so
much for having me um yeah there's a
larger game going on here in which
Congress members of Congress are
weaponizing this fight to try to control
University life and uh and are
threatening uh sanctions such as taxing
University endowments or withholding
Federal funding for research uh which
could have a very serious impact on
universities so beyond the relationship
between protesters and University
administrations we have a second level
playing out between Congress the US
government and University
administrations as well are those just
idle threats or is that a serious
concern for these
universities these are very serious
concerns uh regardless of how you feel
about the protest and University
reactions uh these are extremely serious
concerns because there's a large amount
of federal funding that supports
research across campuses uh in the
United States and endowment play an
extremely important role in funding the
operations of universities so these are
serious threats that University
administrators are very concerned about
and so the actions of Congress are not
just you know political efforts to to uh
exert uh congress's control over
academic freedom or Free Speech but they
also potentially may be serious threats
with material implications we've seen a
range of uh tactics used by different
University administrations around the
United States when it comes to trying to
break up these protests I mean what do
you think has worked so far and how do
you think that University should be
handling
them yeah so I think it's pretty clear
that repression doesn't work in this
case and we actually know this from
political science research that under
many conditions uh Pro repressing
protests and mobilization actually
backfires and causes active to double
down on their efforts and that seems to
be playing out here on University
campuses you can just look to the
example of Colombia where the president
uh cracked down and now we've just seen
waves of waves of additional protesters
coming out so I think you know the
choice of Hardcore repression often
backfires there's some variation state
to state because some places have
actually some US states have actually
criminalized BDS and adopted the H ra
definition of anti-semitism which
equates any uh criticism of Israel with
anti-Semitism and this puts uh activists
and protesters in a different set of
situations as well something a little
bit more subtle now I mean how much
disinformation is happening around these
protests because there are very
different narratives aren't
there yeah absolutely and of course
we're living in the era of
disinformation on social media and
people's algorithms tailor their social
media feeds to their preference
but it's quite evident that there's a
fair amount of disinformation based on
reporting not just by people posting on
social media but by journalists that by
and large these protests are entirely
peaceful we even see sort of
Multicultural communities breaking out
on campuses where you have Jewish
students who are an important component
of the protests as well sharing Passover
saders with Muslim Students who've never
been to that before so by and large
these are very pre peaceful protests and
most of the slogans are not meant to be
provocative although you know there are
some examples where uh people have taken
exception with some of the slogans um
including in some of the reporting right
and just very briefly before we've got
to let you go how do you think that this
is going to play out do you think that
uh there's still momentum Behind These
protests and that they could escalate
further yes I think there's definitely a
real possibility for further escalation
I don't think this is going anywhere and
sure many of these protests will be shut
down at some point with brute force and
arrests or perhaps some negotiations
between Pro protesters and University
Administration that may play out well I
think that's probably the best scenario
to have a kind of negotiated solution it
remains to be seen whether there can be
some meeting point of Administrators and
student demands okay we'll have to leave
it there but we really do appreciate
your time and your insight into all of
this that's Melanie Kemet professor of
international Affairs at Harvard
University thanks so
much thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer